Add `bf16`, `f64f64` and `f80` types (#3456)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/add-bf16-f64f64-and-f80-type.md

- `f80` in `core::arch` for the extended float format used in the x86 and x86_64 architectures

Also, this proposal introduces `c_longdouble` in `core::ffi` to represent the correct format for 'long double' in C.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

The types listed above may be widely used in existing native code, but are not available on all targets. Their underlying representations are quite different from 16-bit and 128-bit binary floating format defined in IEEE 754.

In respective targets (namely PowerPC and x86), the target-specific extended types are referenced by `long double`, which makes `long double` ambiguous in the context of FFI. Thus defining `c_longdouble` should help interoperating with C code using the `long double` type.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

`bf16` is available on all targets. The operators and constants defined for `f32` are also available for `bf16`.

For `f64f64` and `f80`, their availability is limited to the following targets, but this may change over time:

- `f64f64` is supported on `powerpc-*` and `powerpc64(le)-*`, available in `core::arch::{powerpc, powerpc64}`

> - `f80` is supported on `i[356]86-*` and `x86_64-*`, available in `core::arch::{x86, x86_64}`

Reviewer: How useful (and feasible) would it be to also make these types `target_feature`-dependent?

`bf16` is an odd one in a way, because hardware accelerations (where they exist) tend to just use `f32` and truncate anyway. Emulating that with `f32` hardware is likely to be cheap.

However, there are new, emerging formats that are unlikely to have that property. AArch64 has [some 8-bit FP formats on the way](https://community.arm.com/arm-community-blogs/b/architectures-and-processors-blog/posts/arm-a-profile-architecture-developments-2023#mcetoc_1hbvjighi1), for example. Their incorporation into Rust would have complexities, but they're different enough from existing formats that we probably wouldn't want a polyfill for hardware that doesn't have them. Instead, I'd expect them to need a `target_feature` guard or similar (like Neon and SVE types).

Finally: something we observed during SVE prototyping (#3268) is that sometimes, [we'd really like the target feature to be associated with the _type_](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3268#issuecomment-1755669417), rather than the function. That's not quite the same as gating availability that way, but it's perhaps related.

The operators and constants defined for `f32` or `f64` are available for `f64f64` and `f80` in their respective arch-specific modules.

> All the proposed types, including `bf16`, `f64f64` and `f80`, do not have literal representation. Instead, they can be converted to or from IEEE-754 compliant types.

Reviewer 2: IEEE 754

> All the proposed types, including `bf16`, `f64f64` and `f80`, do not have literal representation. Instead, they can be converted to or from IEEE-754 compliant types.

Reviewer 3: Updated.

# Reference-level explanation

> [reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

Reviewer 4: For all of these types, what is their interaction with https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3514 -- i.e., what exactly is guaranteed (or not) about their NaN values? Is there any other kind of non-determinism for any of them?

## `bf16` type

> `bf16` consists of 1 sign bit, 8 bits of exponent, 7 bits of mantissa. Some ARM, AArch64, x86 and x86_64 targets support `bf16` operations natively. For other targets, they will be promoted into `f32` before computation and truncated back into `bf16`.

Reviewer 4: Is that equivalent to whatever the IEEE semantics of bf16 are, if such a thing exists?

Reviewer 4: Reading other comments below it seems like this is actually an incorrect emulation. So it will be the case, for the first time in Rust history, that primitive operations such as multiplying two elements of `bf16` have target-dependent behavior. That's a major downside of the RFC and needs to be discussed and justified more explicitly. The RFC should also state explicitly what is *guaranteed* to be true about `bf16` arithmetic on all targets -- that's needed e.g. for unsafe code authors to know what they can rely on in terms of soundness.

Reviewer 5: It should be possible to emulate correct rounding semantics, so this frankly seems like a bug in those softfp impls.

It does require temporarily switching to RTZ mode, and then you can truncate the result with RTN-ties-even.

Reviewer 4: Or maybe alternatively the answer for all these float types is -- the resulting bit patterns are entirely unspecified and not guaranteed to be portable in any way.

But even then we need to document how deterministic they are. Does passing the exact same inputs to the operation multiple times during a program execution always definitely produce the exact same outputs, on all targets and optimization levels? For regular floats, the answer turns out to be "only when there are no NaNs" -- that's what https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3514 is all about.

Reviewer 6: iirc, you can do a single add/sub/mul/div/sqrt `bf16` operation by promoting to `f32`, doing the operation in `f32`, and then rounding back to `bf16` using the same rounding mode, *not* truncating. That is assuming, of course, that `bf16` actually meets the conditions which are iirc something like having `bf16`'s mantissa bit count be less than half of `f32`'s mantissa bit count minus 1 or 2.

this is like how you can do that with `f32` and `f64`, which is how you can do `f32` operations in JavaScript by using `Math.fround`.

Reviewer 4: That's true for the regular IEEE formats, yes -- it was proven [here](https://hal.science/hal-01091186/document).

But I don't know if bf16 is enough like an IEEE format to make that theorem apply.

Reviewer 6: > That's true for the regular IEEE formats, yes -- it was proven [here](https://hal.science/hal-01091186/document).
> 
> But I don't know if bf16 is enough like an IEEE format to make that theorem apply.

it is, `bf16` is just `f16` with a few more exponent bits and a few less mantissa bits, everything else is the same.

Reviewer 5: `bf16` is just `f32` with the lower 16 mantissa bits dropped. As `f64` values that can be rounded to `f32` are effectively `f32` values with 29 extra mantissa bits, there would be no difference here.

Reviewer 6: > Also, does LLVM when it compiles bf16 to f32 guarantee to do the rounding back to `bf16` after _each and every operation_, never doing more than one operation "at once" in `f32` mode?

that I don't know, but I hope LLVM at least tries to be correct in non-fast-math mode

Reviewer 4: > that I don't know, but I hope LLVM at least tries to be correct in non-fast-math mode

That should definitely be noted as something to figure out before stabilization.

`bf16` will generate the `bfloat` type in LLVM IR.

## `f64f64` type

`f64f64` is the legacy extended floating point format used on PowerPC targets. It consists of two `f64`s, with the former acting as a normal `f64` and the latter for an extended mantissa.

> The following `From` traits are implemented in `core::arch::{powerpc, powerpc64}` for conversion between `f64f64` and other floating point types:

Reviewer 4: It sounds like this type does not have semantics that are equivalent to any IEEE float type. But we need some document to explain exactly what their semantics are, i.e. the exact bits you get out when doing arithmetic on values of this type. Does such a document exist?

Reviewer 5: That's a good question. Basically, it would act like an f64x2 vector, but when exactly bits will move between the two is a question that would need to be answered.

Reviewer 6: > For the most part, it would act like an f64x2 vector

wait, that's not at all how `f64f64` arithmetic works, it instead works more like a big-integer. e.g. here's multiplying two double-double values in the `twofloat` crate: https://docs.rs/twofloat/0.7.0/src/twofloat/arithmetic.rs.html#145

Reviewer 4: Yeah that's more like what I expected. Is there an explanation somewhere of what the "meaning" of such an `(a, b)` pair is, i.e. what is its mathematical-valued semantics? Is it `a + b` (where this is mathematical inf-precision `+` on rational numbers)?

Is the behavior of all basic operations on that kind of representation exactly guaranteed, the same way IEEE exactly guarantees behavior for our regular floats?

Reviewer 5: Not knowing the details of the `fast_two_sum` function, that looks to be a binomial product, which is what I was referring to with "multiplication/division, etc., would cross" though I guess I wasn't quite clear on that.

Reviewer 6: > Given the unusual semantics and the somewhat legacy nature of `f64f64`, would it be better to just provide a type with no methods/trait implementations

sounds good to me! though I'd at least have `Copy`, `Clone`, `Default`, and `Debug`, where `Debug` could just be as if it was: `struct f64f64 { high: f64, low: f64 }`

Reviewer 6: > Not knowing the details of the `fast_two_sum` function, that looks to be a binomial product, which is what I was referring to with "multiplication/division, etc., would cross" though I guess I wasn't quite clear on that.

ok, yeah. addition and subtraction also don't act like a `f64x2`, about the only ops that act like `f64x2` are neg, abs, and copy.

Reviewer 4: > Not knowing the details of the `fast_two_sum` function, that looks to be a binomial product, which is what I was referring to with "multiplication/division, etc., would cross" though I guess I wasn't quite clear on that.

So -- what is the mathematical value of a pair `(a, b)` then, the rational number this represents?

Reviewer 6: > Yeah that's more like what I expected. Is there an explanation somewhere of what the "meaning" of such an `(a, b)` pair is, i.e. what is its mathematical-valued semantics? Is it `a + b` (where this is mathematical inf-precision `+` on rational numbers)?

yee, it is `high + low` where the number is the exact mathematical sum of two `f64`s

> Is the behavior of all basic operations on that kind of representation exactly guaranteed, the same way IEEE exactly guarantees behavior for our regular floats?

I've heard that many special functions (like sin, cos, etc.) don't even always return canonical values (as in the result is represented differently than the exact same number would be by arithmetic ops), idk which ones.

Reviewer 4: Oh, there are non-canonical representations? That then also opens interesting questions for `==`...

> Not knowing the details of the fast_two_sum function, that looks to be a binomial product, which is what I was referring to with "multiplication/division, etc., would cross" though I guess I wasn't quite clear on that.

That's also an option, of course.

```rust
impl From<bf16> for f64f64 { /* ... */ }
impl From<f32> for f64f64 { /* ... */ }
impl From<f64> for f64f64 { /* ... */ }
```

`f64f64` will generate `ppc_fp128` type in LLVM IR.

## `f80` type

> `f80` represents the extended precision floating point type on x86 targets, with 1 sign bit, 15 bits of exponent and 63 bits of mantissa.

Reviewer 7: What is the size and alignment of `f80` on x86?  gcc can change it using the `-m96bit-long-double` and `-m128bit-long-double` options, although only one is conformant with the ABI.

Do we also use `f80` for the 80-bit floating point format on m68k?  It is nearly identical to the Intel format, although it supports normalized numbers with a biased exponent of 0 and is big endian.

Reviewer 5: Alignment would be set by the ABI.

Reviewer 8: For reference, ABI says 16 bytes (same as f128)

![image](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/assets/13724985/477ed0cc-a539-490d-8bff-864244af36e4)

Reviewer 6: oh, according to gcc, the ABI size is 96 bits on x86 and 128 bits on x86_64: https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/x86-Options.html#index-m96bit-long-double

Reviewer 8: Interesting, the alignment is also reduced to make use of that extra space

<img width="948" alt="image" src="https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/assets/13724985/df3d4514-9698-4ff1-acaa-7eb342aaf073">

(From table 2.1 at https://www.uclibc.org/docs/psABI-i386.pdf)

> `f80` represents the extended precision floating point type on x86 targets, with 1 sign bit, 15 bits of exponent and 63 bits of mantissa.

Reviewer 4: So this is following strict IEEE float semantics, just with different sizes than the existing types we have? That should be stated explicitly.

Reviewer 5: Ish. x87 has some weirdness in subnormal and nonfinite values, and it has an explicit integer bit, unlike the other interchange formats (which directly results in the aformentioned weirdness).

> `f80` represents the extended precision floating type on x86 targets, with 1 sign bit, 15 bits of exponent and 63 bits of mantissa.
> 
> The following `From` traits are implemented in `core::arch::{x86, x86_64}` for conversion between `f64f64` and other floating types:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`f80` represents the extended precision floating point type on x86 targets, with 1 sign bit, 15 bits of exponent and 63 bits of mantissa.

The following `From` traits are implemented in `core::arch::{x86, x86_64}` for conversion between `f80` and other floating point types:
```
This includes the correction from the other comment by @teor2345.

```rust
impl From<bf16> for f80 { /* ... */ }
impl From<f32> for f80 { /* ... */ }
impl From<f64> for f80 { /* ... */ }
```

> `f80` will generate `x86_fp80` type in LLVM IR.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`f80` will generate the `x86_fp80` type in LLVM IR.
```

## `c_longdouble` type in FFI

`core::ffi::c_longdouble` will always represent whatever `long double` does in C. Rust will defer to the compiler backend (LLVM) for what exactly this represents, but it will approximately be:

> - 80-bit extended precision (f80) on `x86` and `x86_64`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `f80` extended precision on `x86` and `x86_64`:
```

- `f64` double precision with MSVC
- `f128` quadruple precision on AArch64
- `f64f64` on PowerPC

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> `bf16` is not a IEEE-754 standard type, so adding it as primitive type may break existing consistency for builtin float types. The truncation after calculation on targets not supporting `bf16` natively also breaks how Rust treats precision loss in other cases.

Reviewer 6: correctly rounding `bf16` can be relatively easily implemented. `bf16` add/sub/mul/div/sqrt can then just convert to `f32`, do a single operation, and round to `bf16`, which will always give the correct `bf16` result.
round to `bf16` code (not tested):
```rust
fn f32_to_bf16(v: f32) -> bf16 {
    let b32 = v.to_bits();
    bf16::from_bits(if v.is_nan() {
        (b32 >> 16) as u16
    } else if b32 & 0xFFFF == 0x8000 {
        let b16 = (b32 >> 16) as u16;
        b16.wrapping_add(b16 & 1)
    } else {
        (b32.wrapping_add(0x8000) >> 16) as u16
    }
}
```

Reviewer 6: round to `bf16` code staying entirely in SSE registers on x86_64:
https://rust.godbolt.org/z/85Ks9sPP6

Author: The code you provided looks like direct truncation. I need to confirm if the rounding behavior is fixed (tozero? tonearest? toinfinity?) or depending on system rounding mode.

Also, clang provides an option `-fbfloat16-excess-precision` to specify the 'merging' behavior of bfloat operations. For example, will the intermediate result of `a-b+c` be rounded? But I think that's not an issue for Rust, the value should be `none` (no merging will be performed).

Reviewer 6: > The code you provided looks like direct truncation.

it is round to nearest, ties to even. truncation (round towards zero) would be only:
`bf16::from_bits((f32::to_bits(v) >> 16) as u16)`

> I need to confirm if the rounding behavior is fixed (tozero? tonearest? toinfinity?) or depending on system rounding mode.

LLVM assumes the rounding mode is round to nearest, ties to even, unless you use the constrained fp intrinsics that rustc doesn't support (yet?).

> `bf16` is not a IEEE-754 standard type, so adding it as primitive type may break existing consistency for builtin float types. The truncation after calculation on targets not supporting `bf16` natively also breaks how Rust treats precision loss in other cases.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`bf16` is not an IEEE 754 standard type, so adding it as primitive type may break existing consistency for builtin float types. The truncation after calculations on targets not supporting `bf16` natively also breaks how Rust treats precision loss in other cases.
```

> `bf16` is not an IEEE 754 standard type, so adding it as primitive type may break existing consistency for builtin float types. The truncation after calculations on targets not supporting `bf16` natively also breaks how Rust treats precision loss in other cases.

Reviewer 6: I think the idea is that on targets not supporting `bf16`, a technically-incorrect and lazy but fast and sometimes good enough approximation is commonly used: doing the operations as `f32` and then taking the high half of the `f32` result, which has incorrect rounding (that `f32` to `bf16` conversion truncates instead of rounding to nearest, ties to even like all other FP normal operations).

`c_longdouble` are not uniquely determined by architecture, OS and ABI. On the same target, C compiler options may change what representation `long double` uses.

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

> [half](https://github.com/starkat99/half-rs) crate provides implementation of binary16 and bfloat16 types.
> 
> However, besides the disadvantage of usage inconsistency between primitive type and type from crate, there are still issues around those bindings.
> 
> The availablity of additional float types depends on CPU/OS/ABI/features of different targets heavily. Evolution of LLVM may also unlock possibility of the types on new targets. Implementing them in compiler handles the stuff at the best location.
> 
> Most of such crates defines their type on top of C binding. But extended float type definition in C is complex and confusing. The meaning of `long double`, `_Float128` varies by targets or compiler options. Implementing in Rust compiler helps to maintain a stable codegen interface.
> 
> And since third party tools also relies on Rust internal code, implementing additional float types in compiler also help the tools to recognize them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The [half](https://github.com/starkat99/half-rs) crate provides an implementation of the binary16 and bfloat16 formats.

However, besides the disadvantage of usage inconsistency between primitive types and types from crates, there are still issues around those bindings.

The availablity of additional float types heavily depends on CPU/OS/ABI/features of different targets. Evolution of LLVM may also unlock the possibility of the types on new targets. Implementing them in the compiler handles the stuff at the best location.

Most of such crates define their type on top of C bindings. However the extended float type definition in C is complex and confusing. The meaning of `long double` and `_Float128` varies by targets or compiler options. Implementing them in the Rust compiler helps to maintain a stable codegen interface.

And since third party tools also rely on Rust internal code, implementing additional float types in the compiler also helps the tools to recognize them.
```

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

There is a previous proposal on `f16b` type to represent `bfloat16`: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2690.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

> This proposal does not contain information for FFI with C's `_Float128` and `__float128` type. [RFC #3453](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3453) focuses on type conforming to IEEE 754 `binary128`.

Reviewer 8: This can probably be dropped since `f128` is in nightly now.

> This proposal does not contain information for FFI with C's `_Float128` and `__float128` type. Because they are not so commonly used compared to `long double`, and they are even more complex than the situation of `c_longdouble` (for example, their semantics are different under C or C++ mode).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This proposal does not contain information for FFI with C's `_Float128` and `__float128` type, because they are not so commonly used compared to `long double`, and they are even more complex than the situation of `c_longdouble` (for example, their semantics are different under C and C++).
```

Reviewer 2: I think this is not the reason, indeed,  on some target `c_longdouble`  needs `_Float128`, The real reason is because we have a different proposal for it. Do not said this as it's misleading

Author: PowerPC has option to control what `long double` means: `f64`, `f128` or `f64f64`. But since it is in transition to `f128` as of the time of writing, we can drop a little history burden and set `f128` on little-endian 64-bit targets.

I don't make sure if x86 has similar option. If not, we can confidently introduce `c_longdouble`.

> Although statements like `X target supports A type` is used in above text, some target may only support some type when some target features are enabled. Such features are assumed to be enabled, with precedents like `core::arch::x86_64::__m256d` (which is part of AVX).

Reviewer 8: Could you list what exactly these target features are in the reference-level explanation section? This RFC should propose whether we want to just disallow the types without relevant target features (probably acceptable) or try to polyfill them somehow (I hope not, unless somebody is extremely motivated).

> Although statements like `X target supports A type` is used in above text, some target may only support some type when some target features are enabled. Such features are assumed to be enabled, with precedents like `core::arch::x86_64::__m256d` (which is part of SSE).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Although statements like `X target supports A type` is used in above text, some target may only support some type when some target features are enabled. Such features are assumed to be enabled, with precedents like `core::arch::x86_64::__m256d` (which is part of AVX).
```

> Although statements like `X target supports A type` is used in above text, some target may only support some type when some target features are enabled. Such features are assumed to be enabled, with precedents like `core::arch::x86_64::__m256d` (which is part of SSE).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Although statements like `X target supports A type` is used in the above text, some targets may only support some type when some target features are enabled. Such features are assumed to be enabled, with precedents like `core::arch::x86_64::__m256d` (which is part of AVX).
```
This includes the correction from the other comment by @programmerjake.

> Representation of `long double` in C may depend on some compiler options. For example, in Clang on `powerpc64le-*`, `-mabi=ieeelongdouble`/`-mabi=ibmlongdouble`/`-mlong-double-64` will set `long double` as `fp128`/`ppc_fp128`/`double` in LLVM. Currently, the default option is assumed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Representation of `long double` in C may depend on some compiler options. For example, Clang on `powerpc64le-*`, `-mabi=ieeelongdouble`/`-mabi=ibmlongdouble`/`-mlong-double-64` will set `long double` as `fp128`/`ppc_fp128`/`double` in LLVM. Currently, the default option is assumed.
```
